And that was just a different breed.
Like I said, good game to a bad
Good game to a bad
... game. 90 minutes.
Stop this one, mate.
Right. Welcome, Minister. It's wonderful to have you here in our afternoon
session. Thank you for your time. Now, we
have you for 30 minutes, and I understand you want to give
a brief introduction, and then we'll open up for questions.
Yeah. Look, thank you, Madam Chair and committee members.
It's good to see you, and I know that you're coming towards the end of
what's been quite a long day. So,
exciting stuff to talk about in Stats NZ, and lots of
good things happening. So I've got Colin and Rachel here,
from Stats NZ, who are going to be in support of
the presentation today. But look, I just want to start
by acknowledging the work that Stats do and the important role
that they play in what it is to
be a New Zealander. How we
gather information, data, and then how we use it, how we allocate it.
As parliamentarians, we use that sort of data
regularly, constantly, in funding decisions for all sorts of
things.
Society uses the data. It has to be transparent, it has to be
reliable, it has to be credible. And that's primarily one of the
things that I want to make sure that Stats do, and I'm confident that
they can do that under Colin's leadership.
And I'm looking forward to him talking a little bit about that.
So,
through this year's budget, there's quite a significant investment in
the modernization of the integrated data
infrastructure.
Members will be familiar with that.
It's a piece of infrastructure that is now quite
old, but it's important in terms of where we go,
particularly in terms of the social investment approach that government
is taking. But,
I want to just also just touch on the work that
Stats are doing in terms of moving towards an admin
data census model, in 2030. And I
think probably there will be some questions from members maybe around that.
And so that will be a matter that
we can talk more about a little later.
I want to just also mention the piece of work that Stats are doing
in terms of introducing a monthly consumer price
index
report.
We are a bit of an outlier in New Zealand not producing
monthly CPI reports. So that will
be a project that will be in place from 2027,
and that'll provide more timely insights into inflation.
And it will keep the economist commentariat, hopefully,
more briefed more regularly.
And then I just want to touch on the work that they are also doing in terms of
modernizing New Zealand's economic statistics so that they better
reflect the way our economy works and how it's
changing. We know that data
information, the collection of it,
AI, how we gather it, how we collect it, what
we do with it, it's all changing very quickly.
And Stats needs to be at the forefront of that
process and to keep relevant, trustworthy, open, and transparent.
So with that, Madam Chair, I'm quite happy to
answer questions with the assistance of my colleagues.
Thank you. And our first question's with Lamona.
Oh, thanks, Minister. I appreciate your opening comments.
Want to ask in terms of the cuts to baseline,
how many roles will the budget savings remove from Stats New Zealand,
and over what timeframe?
Okay.
That's probably an operational matter that's best answered by
the chief statistician. But I simply
would say that
Stats is going to be resourced very adequately to do the job that we've
asked them to do. It's a period of growth and change for Stats.
So I'm confident that that process in terms of managing people,
will be well handled by the chief statistician and his team.
And Colin, if you've got any comment that you want to make.
Yeah.
So, the government has been clear that it wants a smaller and more efficient and
digitally oriented public sector.
Targets and numbers have been published, which we're, to the
minister and myself.
Look, we're still working through the details of how that will be delivered.
The targets are one of a number of planning parameters that support
development of a performance plan, which we're working through, which
will be reported to Cabinet later in the year.
And look, at this stage, I think it would be premature of me to comment
on work that's underway and isn't fully developed yet.
Yeah. Th- thank you for highlighting that, but is there any
suggested timeframe in how long the exercise will take?
Yeah, so I'm
working to an honest public sector service timeline, and we'll
work through that. As the chief executive, I
am focused on ensuring we're always efficient and effective.
So for me it's a
continuous process. So we're always focused on how we best deliver our services
most efficiently and effectively.
Okay. Fran's got us up.
Thank you, Chair. And just following on from,
Lamona's, Lydia's question.
It's quite an ambitious thing that Stats is being asked to do, isn't it?
You're transitioning to an admin for a census at the same time
you're doing monthly CPI, at the same time
that you're
embracing AI
architecture in how Stats works. At the same time, the
government is looking to make cuts of around 54 million
by
2028, I believe. Is that feasible?
Are there any risks to that?
Well, there is risk with everything that happens, and
change inevitably involves risk.
But I think it's realistically able to be managed.
As I say, I'm confident in the professional skill of
the leadership team at Stats and also the
team that makes up Stats NZ.
Yeah.
They are competent, they're professional, and adroit and
agile in terms of what they can see needs to be done.
If we are to have a modern, effective,
reliable,
statistical base in New Zealand, then these changes actually do
need to be made.
I'm thinking particularly, for instance, around the census.
The
old historic paper-based,
enumerated census is
not particularly effective, it costs a lot of money, and hasn't produced the
kind of results that I think New Zealanders would want or could need to rely on.
So yeah, I'm confident. I don't know whether you two want to make any-
Yeah. The only thing I'd add is, as we do all the new census
approach and other investments, very much part of that is
refactoring how we work, finding better and more effective
ways of working. So that investment does in the new census,
in modern macroeconomic statistics, in the IDI, will also
be part of thinking about how we'd deliver efficiently and effectively.
Thank you. And-
But can I just-
Oh, yeah
... add to that, just to put one example.
I've
taken the opportunity to visit quite a few of the Stats offices and what have you,
and one of the things that surprised me was
that there are still good, hardworking Stats staff
keying in to spreadsheets information about CPI.
Listing, this is the price of a lettuce or a tin of tuna
or bread or whatever. And so it's immediately obvious
that that a kind of input could be streamlined, could
be made more easy, not only for the person who's keying in the data,
but actually in terms of the whole system.
Mm.
So that's kind of where-
Mm
... I can see just as a lay person, and I'm not a statistician,
but just as a lay person, it's easy to see where there are immediate
easy technology gains.
The monthly CPI program is designed to
exactly do that. So to create new technology
that stops us having to manually enter anything.
Okay, thank you. I've got a primary from Andy.
Yeah, look,
I've long been very interested in population data,
and particularly migration data as a subset for that.
Been interesting seeing some of your projections for population growth in
regional areas.
And births and deaths, you see the changes happening there.
But the migration data says 200, 200, 200,
200, 200 every five years, or 500, 500, 500, 500.
And it's been said by
other agencies that you're on a absolute hiding to nothing, trying to work out what
those numbers ought to be-
Mm
... because we don't have any long-term migration strategy.
How do you go about doing that? And how do you go about responding to
potential changes in,
particularly in economic opportunity in an area, so new development
houses in a particular area, or something goes away, a business closes down,
whatever it might be, and you go, "Well, that might change the
numbers." How responsive are your
data projections? Because this also goes to we ask councils to-
Yeah
... provide for 30 years' housing growth, and we have no strategy beyond the next
30 minutes,
and we're asking them to do the impossible.
We're asking you effectively to do the impossible as well.
Yeah. So in terms of the projections at the moment,
they're on that five-year cycle tied into the-
The census
... the census.
Mm.
And so through the new program and the transition into the new census
model, we'll have more opportunity to think about more timely
projections and how often we might be able to-
Right
... to update those. So yeah, the limitation at the moment is very much
through the census.
But even so, you're still looking backwards to look forwards, and that's a pretty-
Yeah
... that's pretty difficult position-
That's a difficult position
... to be able to tell what the future's going to be when all you're doing is look
at the past.
Yeah.
Yeah. We purposely use the word projections-
Yeah
... rather than forecasts because it's not really a forecast.
We're not taking into account an awful lot of the other factors you described.
We are providing sort of a baseline
for councils or other-
Mm
... people who might use them to have something to start with.
And certainly we definitely have conversations with each council as we produce
those forecasts and explain them carefully.
But
there is always a lot of other things that could happen.
So we encourage the councils to think of them as
this is a set of things and then you can make judgments around them
yourself.
I'm encouraging governments to have a strategy.
Yeah.
But one of the benefits of a more
modern census-type model is that you get
information more regularly.
Faster.
Once you're faster-
Yeah
... more up to date-
... more current, more regularly,
and I think that's a huge win for planners,
governments,
anyone that's needing to have up-to-date current information.
At the moment, the data that is received from the
census is often several years late by the time
it's collected. And then several-
That's backwards looking too
... and then several years late by the time it is released in a
digestible format.
Primary from Melissa.
Thank you. It seems it's all sort of related, so everything from census
information to the previous IDI system that you're upgrading.
It's about modernizing and actually having better
access and utilization of the data.
One of the things that the minister started off was with social investment.
Are you able to tell me how the IDI upgrade and
modernization is actually going to be supporting the social investment
approach to public service?
Well, I'm sure Colin and Rachel might want to have a comment about this as well.
But
the whole concept of
social investment is to effectively
front-load the
support of the state to where it is most needed,
rather than simply,
if I can use a
not particularly scientific term, but rather than just spraying
that support around and hoping that some of it is effective and sticks, it's
actually a more targeted approach.
And I well remember former Prime Minister Bill
English,
who I think we can safely say was the
father of the concept of
a social investment model for New Zealand.
He used to regularly say, "Look, there's only five and a bit million of us.
Qantas has a larger database than that.
Surely, it's not that hard."
And if you think about the quantum,
actually five and a bit million people isn't, by
international standards, a particularly big database.
And so to use that-
It's a city
... yeah, so to use that collective information and data
more effectively, more efficiently, and
in a way that is actually going to benefit
primarily the people involved, who need that
support most, in a way that benefits them as individuals.
But not only them, but it benefits their families, their communities, their
neighborhoods, and ultimately us as a nation. I think that's very powerful.
The integrated data that would be available
for not only the community, as you say, but the government
departments and actually government, how do you think they can
actually utilize the data in order to grow our economy?
Well, almost limited only by their imagination and
use of that data. I'm constantly
inspired and surprised sometimes by the way people use
data in ways that
simply I didn't even think of or couldn't imagine.
And then someone says, "Oh, we're doing this, this, and that with this data." And
you think, "Wow, that's phenomenal."
Colin, you might have some specific examples, but one I can think
of is in the horticultural sector around our
kiwifruit production. And you'd go and talk to some of those
kiwifruit orchardists and the people from Zespri, and they know
exactly where new
kiwifruit areas should be planted, and that's based on
a combination of population, services,
roading, and this amalgamation of
various pieces of data and information that come together to
help them form commercial decision making in a
way that they can only do it if they've got good data, good information.
But they're using that in a way that I didn't think of, I wasn't aware of.
Good on them.
We can also monitor things better, don't you think?
There is a saying in Korean, you can't pour water into a
broken jar of water jar. It doesn't translate that well into English.
My experience is that there's always a saying in Korean.
So the government would be able to pick up the wastage.
Yeah.
If things are not working-
Yeah
... with better data, we can actually-
Correct
... pick it up faster and actually fix it.
Correct.
Cool.
Would you like, I can give three quick examples-
Sure
... that are just very practical.
That'd be lovely.
Yeah, so just let me pick three. One from an NGO, from the
IHC. They use the IDI to
provide a comprehensive picture of the lives of those with intellectual disability
that they're supporting, not just to understand their health needs, to
understand their engagement with the education system, to understand their
engagement with ACC. So painted a very rich portrait of
their clients' needs.
The IDI was used by the Social Wellbeing Agency
in emergencies to create pictures of communities quite quickly, and quite a
rich picture of communities where there's particular need
after weather events. So that's used there.
And
we have worked closely with the Ministry of Education, so their school equity index
that helps allocate funding. That's something that's
underpinned by the analysis and the IDI.
So they're three quite practical examples of its use.
Thank you. Okay, Andy has a sup on that.
Yeah, look, I was going to change the sup after the Aura example I've got, which
was the, just could we use that same approach to
deciding where is a good place to put kiwifruit orchards, but also to where we've
put urban development?
Also-
Because one of the things that really riles councils is they do all the
planning, et cetera, and then somebody decides they're going to stick something out
over there, or over there, or over there, usually at significant
cost to the council, whether it's immediate or some future date.
We don't seem to use that or allow empowerment in that way.
But could IDI be used to do that kind of thing?
If it can be used for kiwifruit, surely it could be used for other things like
that.
I won't talk to housing policy.
Yes.
No, there's another committee-
There is another
committee
... down the hall.
But look, I am familiar. So look-
With infrastructure safety
... so our data is used by the Housing and Urban
Development, or NZHERDS as it will become, quite actively, so it is already used,
and we do work quite closely-
Great
... with them already on a number of fronts.
So it is embedded in some of the investment in housing, and
where that's allocated has been informed by IDI analysis.
Yeah, and look, can I just ask, just you two, we've got this big investment in
modernization. Can we just
You know, unpack a little bit what modernization means.
Is it different data, or different data sets, or different systems?
Different ways of working, talking to itself? What is it?
So there's sort of three components.
Yeah.
So the first one is around the legacy technology itself,
so upgrading that technology to be a more modern
platform. And what that enables us to do is to actually be able
to refresh the data that comes into the IDI
far more frequently. So at the moment, we're really limited to three
times a year to do a significant update, which obviously
limits the timing of research that can be done.
One of the other aspects of it is that we'll be able to
have more researchers in total, so more
capacity available to take on more research projects.
And then lastly, through new technology, we can also
look at how we maintain and strengthen the privacy protections
around that, because it just gives us a lot more control, and
assurance around those things as well.
So that's sort of the key things in the IDI
development.
Good. Thank you.
Thank you. Primary from .
Good.
Thank you. And so Minister, you explained the benefits
of moving to a new system. I want to ask in terms of future
predictions, if you're going to have baseline reductions,
5% in '27, '28, and further 5%, what
does that actually mean in Stats NZ dollars and
if you're going to a much more advanced system, you're changing methodology, et
cetera?
Yeah, I-- Well, you go.
No, I was going to say, I had thought that you had kind of answered the question
earlier on.
Yeah.
But you want to elucidate?
No, I was going to say, it's very much a repetition.
My response will be a repetition of my previous reply, which is,
we are working carefully through what that means,
into our performance plans, and we'll report to ministers and Cabinet in due course
on that. But that's still a work in progress.
Do you think-
Yeah.
anybody else?
You got another primary?
No?
No, because-
No? Okay. Look, we're finishing early, Minister.
Thank you.
Before we do finish,
I just wanted to acknowledge sitting at the table, Dr. Shane Reti.
I want to acknowledge the work that he did in this ministerial role during
his time as minister.
Sorry.
And also to acknowledge his contribution to our
parliament.
Very kind. Thank you, Shane.
And thank you. We do actually have one more-
Oh, very kind.
Just one more.
Oh.
Shane's
last .
So you can hear us for that.
But in terms of census information, and there has been
some
public notification that changes.
Yeah.
What kind of consultation has been received by the department
or any pushbacks in terms of consultation?
So we have,
over the last two years, done extensive consultation through this change process.
What I can say is that as we go forward, we're very
actively engaging with communities.
We are creating reference groups across different communities.
Māori reference group is in place, and we'll create one for Pacifica,
we'll create one for housing needs or the homeless
measurement,
rainbow community, and I'm missing one, I'm sure.
So we are very actively engaged with communities at multiple
levels so that they understand the change that is coming, and we
understand their data needs, and they can reflect that in the changes or in the
approaches as required.
And will that include rural communities?
Yeah. So we're engaged with communities right across New Zealand, yes.
Yeah. Okay, great. Thank you.
Yes.
Thank you.
Thank you, minister.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, members.